Right, so we talked a lot
about polymorphism in the last video
and overridden and overloaded methods.
Let's now see what this means in code.
So I've created a new project here called
polymorphism, and I'm going to create a class
in here, I'm going to call it override example.
Now as you can see,
this code has a base class,
an ExtendedClass, which extends the BaseClass,
and our public class OverrideExample
at the bottom there, just creates an
object of ExtendedClass, then executes a method.
So this is going to be the starting point
for our discussion.
So we'll run this,
BaseClass executing a good method.
So maybe the goodMethod is good,
and the derived class is happy with it,
or maybe the derived class has
a better way to do it,
or they want to add additional stuff
and extend the code in the method.
The way for ExtendedClass to do this is by overriding.
An overridden method in ExtendedClass
must have the same signature,
the same return type,
and it's access modifier must not
be more restrictive.
So with that in mind,
let's add some code to the ExtendedClass body,
and come down here and paste that code
in the ExtendedClass.
So if you run this now,
given what we've set up in the main method there,
run the code, ExtendedClass executing a better method.
So clearly, we're now using
the goodMethod from ExtendedClass.
So that's overriding in a nutshell.
You can extend the functionality
of a base class's method
in the extended class instead
of completely bypassing it,
by calling the parent method using super.
So I'm just going to copy over
the goodMethod we defined in the ExtendedClass
with a new one.
You can see we're now using super
to call goodMethod,
and basically that's going to call
goodMethod from the base class.
Execute the code now,
and you can see the following output:
we've got both outputs now
from both goodMethod's,
the first one in ExtendedClass
and the second one we've got
the output from the BaseClass's goodMethod.
Well an actual fact obviously
the BaseClass was first because of the call
on line 19 invoked that before the output line
on line 17.
All right, so let's continue on with this,
let's add two more methods to each class.
So I've got two methods here I'm going to paste in,
and we're going to add these first to BaseClass.
See we've got printInformation and getInformation,
and then I'm going to do the same for
our ExtendedClass, I'm going to paste in those methods
which are pretty much the same other than the fact
that it's outputting ExtendedClass
instead of BaseClass this time.
So we know where the methods are being called from
or we can see the methods being called.
Now look at these two methods
I've added closely.
Are they both overridden methods?
Now most likely,
your IntelliJ ID is probably illuminated you
if you look at it.
The printInformation method is not
an overridden method,
because the parameter type didn't exactly match.
And we can see that there,
the hint there is that it's never used.
So I've got a string there
defined as a parameter on line 28,
and of course it's a CharSequence on line 12,
for the BaseClass.
So again, confirming here
that printInformation,
that method in ExtendedClass is not
an overridden method because the parameter type
didn't exactly match.
You can use subtypes in the return types
of overridden methods, as shown in this example,
but not in the parameter lists.
You don't get an error on the printInformation
method in ExtendedClass because
it's a valid overloaded method.
Right, so let's add some code to invoke those
methods in our main class.
I'm going to add this code down here.
I'm going to execute the code.
So the call without the cast,
I'll just bring up the code again.
So again, the call without the cast
executed the ExtendedClass's overloaded method,
which accepted a string parameter
which was the type returned from the ExtendedClass's
getInformation overridden method.
Now in the second call,
we cast a string returned
from the getInformation to a CharSequence,
which executed the printInformation method
on BaseClass this time.
So we go back up to our ExtendedClass
and let's change the printInformation
method there, we're going to change it now
so it's a valid overridden method.
So now that we've done that,
we scroll down and have a look,
and then here, Casting e.getInformation
to CharSequence is redundant.
So it's just purely a warning at this point
because we've made that change and we've
got a valid overridden method.
And if you run the code,
you can see in fact ExtendedClass
printInformation method was executed twice.
Now if you go back to that same method,
printInformation, if we change CharSequence S,
the name of the variable to string,
and change the output to the same thing,
we'll run the code again,
you saw the code compiled and ran just fine,
and that proves that the parameter name's
not important here, only the type.
So I've already talked about access modifiers
on overridden methods in a previous video,
but I'm going to show another example here.
If we go back to our ExtendedClass's
printInformation method and try and change
the access from public to private,
we've now got an error,
we can see the error is that it clashes
with the same method in BaseClass
attempting to assign weaker access privileges,
private in this case.
Right, so I'm just going to undo that change.
Now this section wouldn't be complete
unless I talked about the throws clause
of overridden method.
We'll be talking about exception handling
in a future video, but let's just change the code
now to include a throws clause
in one of our methods in the BaseClass.
I'm going to go back up to our BaseClass at the top,
and let's do it on the goodMethod.
So I'm going to come up here, I'm going to do
a throws IOException.
If we scroll down now to the ExtendedClass,
we can see that the goodMethod is still considered
an overridden method,
but we've now got a compiler error on the
call to super.goodMethod.
So I'm going to remove the super call for now.
The other thing I'm going to do
is add a throws clause here.
Throws FileNotFoundException,
and because I haven't got autoimports on,
I'm going to accept that,
and that, you can see at the top of the screen there,
FileNotFoundException's been added.
We've got both of those exceptions now.
So we can see that doing that,
we've got goodMethod in BaseClass
throwing an IOException,
but goodMethod throwing a FileNotFoundException
in the ExtendedClass's goodMethod.
This just confirms that the method
still meets the criteria for an overridden method.
So why's that?
It's because your overridden method can
eliminate the throws clause completely
or it can declare a throws clause
with an exception type that's the same
or a more specific file type.
Now we have got an error down here,
and this error's got to do with the fact
we're not actually doing anything
with the exception, so we'll ignore that error.
But the other code here hasn't got
any compile errors.
So let's change this on the ExtendedClass.
Instead of using a FileNotFoundException,
let's change that to just an exception.
Hover over it, and you can see we've got
a compile error on the declaration line of the method.
Trying to throw a less specific exception
or one that's not considered a
covariant of the original method isn't allowed.
Right, so I'm going to revert the code back
to remove any of the throw statements,
I'm going to remove those altogether.
Add the super.goodMethod back again,
get rid of the other IOException there
that we added as a throw,
and if we now run the code,
it's working as it was before.
And again, just a reminder that
I'm going to talk more about
catching exceptions later.
So the last two videos have
reviewed the subject of polymorphism
and how inheritance and overridden methods
support polymorphism in Java.
I discussed the differences between
overloaded and overridden methods in the last video,
and we went through the rules for proper overriding.
So if you don't override correctly,
you could get a compiler error, or no error,
because your method is a valid overloaded
method instead.
Right so that's the end of the video here,
and in the next one,
we're going to discuss some more
interesting samples of polymorphism.
See you in the next video.